i'm jake o'neil creator of animagraphs
and this is how a car engine works
let's start at a single piston
the powerhouse of the engine
and work our way outwards
4 Stroke Cycle
the four-stroke cycle
when a piston travels to the end of its
range
whether up or down
that's a stroke
car engines use a four-stroke cycle
and it goes like this first intake
the piston descends
sucking an air fuel mixture into the
cylinder
through the intake port
with both intake valves open
next
compression
with all valves closed the piston comes
back up
compressing the fuel and air mixture for
more powerful combustion
then the power stroke
an electrical spark ignites the
compressed fuel and air mixture
and the resulting combustion forces the
piston to the bottom of the cylinder
again
a connecting rod transfers this power to
the crankshaft
finally exhaust
the piston comes back up
pushing the spent mixture out through
open exhaust valves and the exhaust port
Firing Order
connecting multiple pistons
for smooth power delivery pistons take
turns firing
the firing order for this engine
is one
three
four two
Camshaft / Timing Belt
camshafts with specially shaped cams
push spring-loaded valves open in turn
cam gears and a timing belt or chain
links everything to the crankshaft
and it all spins together
[Music]
Crankshaft
the crankshaft translates piston power
out of the engine
it has counterweights to balance against
the pistons for perfectly smooth
revolutions
is what rpm means
we're counting the number of full
crankshaft revolutions per minute
Block / Heads
the engine block holds the crankshaft
and cylinders
and the cylinder head holds valves ports
cams etc
a geared flywheel sits at one side of
the crankshaft
for connection to a transmission
it's also where the starter connects to
the system
V6 / V8
this engine has four cylinders arranged
in a single row
but there are many other possible
configurations
like six cylinders with three on each
side
angled in a v shape
or eight
despite different design goals the basic
engine parts are all there
now let's look at other systems that
support this combustion process
Air Intake
air intake
air comes in through the air filter
and then into the intake manifold where
it mixes with fuel before being sucked
into individual cylinders
through intake ports
Fuel
fuel
the fuel pump carries gas from the tank
through a fuel filter
to the engine
where fuel injectors emit a precisely
timed spray of gas into the intake port
Cooling
cooling
engines get very hot during operation
and require a cooling system
coolant channels around the cylinders
and through the cylinder heads carry a
special liquid called antifreeze
to keep temperatures within safe
operating range
it's called antifreeze because it won't
freeze in icy weather
after cooling hot engine parts coolant
circulates through the radiator
the radiator has a network of small
tubes and fins
coolant passes through these channels
while air pulled in by the radiator fan
blows by the tubes cooling the hot
liquid for recirculation
a water pump keeps the coolant system
flowing and properly pressurized
the thermostat regulates coolant
temperature by either routing coolant
back through the engine
or to the radiator for further cooling
Electrical
electrical
the spark plug delivers the electrical
spark that ignites the fuel air mixture
for combustion the metal core is
insulated from the outer metal casing
with porcelain
the spark jumps between these conductive
surfaces
a coil pack delivers electrical current
to the spark plugs
as directed by the ecm or engine control
module
the ecm is a computer that directs many
core engine functions like spark timing
valve open and closed timing
air to fuel ratio etc
the alternator works like a power
generator
converting the engine's mechanical
energy into electricity to charge the
battery or run other electrical systems
while the engine is running
the battery provides power to the
starter for engine start
[Music]
Oil
oil
motor oil is used to lubricate clean
prevent corrosion improve sealing
and cool the engine by carrying heat
away from moving parts
rings around the top of the piston head
keep oil out of the combustion process
while otherwise allowing the cylinder to
be lubricated
oil galleries are channels through the
engine block and cylinder head that
carry oil to various engine parts
oil flows through the engine and back to
the oil pan for recirculation
[Music]
oil rests in the oil pan when not in
circulation
the oil pump keeps oil properly
pressurized and flowing
and the oil filter keeps oil clean from
contaminants
Exhaust
exhaust
[Music]
the exhaust manifold collects gases from
multiple cylinders into one pipe
exhaust flows through the catalytic
converter which captures toxic chemicals
in engine exhaust
and then out through a muffler that
reduces exhaust noise
Full Model
and finally
here's the full functioning engine with
all the basic systems we've discussed
you
###
- [Narrator] Just about everyone knows
that a typical automobile gets its power
from an engine under the hood,
but how many people can say they actually know
how that engine works?
While a modern internal combustion engine
is obviously an extremely complex piece of machinery,
the basic principle behind it is pretty simple.
Let's take a closer look.
At a high level, a gasoline engine
can be thought of somewhat like an air pump,
except that the exhaust coming out is more of a side effect,
this pump's real purpose is to rotate an internal shaft,
which in turn rotates the vehicle's wheels.
It does this by connecting that shaft,
called a crankshaft, to pistons that move due
to a mixture of air and gasoline combusting
inside their cylinders, which creates a sort
of chain reaction that keeps the engine turning.
Engine Structure
Before getting deeper into this process,
let's first touch on the two main parts of an engine.
On the bottom, a lower "block" is home to the pistons,
cylinders and crankshaft,
the latter of which sends the engine's power out
to the transmission and wheels.
And above, the "head" contains the top of the cylinders
and manages their airflow and combustion
through valvetrain, fuel injection, and ignition systems.
So let's explain that part a little more.
You may have heard the term "four-stroke"
to describe a vehicle engine.
This refers to its four stages of operation:
First, the piston moves down,
creating a vacuum in the cylinder chamber that pulls air in
through precisely controlled intake valves.
Next, the valves close and the piston raises back up,
compressing all that air,
along with some gasoline that was mixed in
from the fuel injection system.
Now the fun part, the ignition system creates a spark
at the end of the spark plug,
creating a controlled explosion
of compressed air and fuel that sends the piston back down.
Then finally, the piston moves back up,
pushing that spent air/fuel mixture
through the exhaust valves and out to the,
you guessed it, exhaust pipes.
And since we're dealing with multiple cylinders
with pistons all working from the same crankshaft,
each one essentially creates the four-stroke process
for the next one.
Pretty ingenious, right?
Engine Configurations
Now speaking of multiple cylinders,
let's talk about the various engine configurations.
Four-cylinder engines are probably the most common design
these days, but who doesn't love a V6?
Or even a V8?
These terms simply refer to the number of cylinders
in the engine, and their layout.
Nearly all four-cylinders engines
have their cylinders arranged in a row,
called "inline" or "straight",
but it's also pretty typical
to see engines group their cylinders
into two banks connected at an angle, a vee.
Doing it this way effectively cuts the engine length
in half, enabling it to fit more easily under the hood.
So a V6?
Three cylinders on either side,
creating a vee shape.
And what if that vee shape was opened up all the way?
A 180-degree angle?
Well then you'd have what's called a boxer,
or flat, engine design.
Alright, so what about those other numbers you always see?
2.0? 3.5?
Well, that refers to the engine's displacement,
often simply thought of as its size.
That number is literally the volume, in liters,
that the pistons displace with every engine cycle.
So essentially, if you were to fill up the cylinders
of a two-liter engine with liquid,
it would take, well, two liters.
And if it's a four-cylinder engine,
each one displaces half a liter.
So what's the end result of all this?
Power.
The measurable output of an engine is called its torque,
basically, the strength with which it turns its crankshaft.
Torque is measured in pound-feet,
which, as the name implies, is the force created
by one pound of weight, at a distance of one foot.
Imagine a one-pound weight sitting at the end
of a one-foot wrench,
that nut is being turned with one pound-foot of torque.
So now, going back to the displacement concept,
bigger cylinders pull in more air and fuel,
typically resulting in more muscle,
they turn the crankshaft with more force,
which is perfect for large vehicles,
towing, or even just spirited driving.
So now you're probably thinking, isn't that horsepower?
Well, yes and no.
In fact, horsepower doesn't technically exist.
Okay, yes, that requires a bit of explanation.
Horsepower is obviously a real thing,
but it's actually a calculation,
not a physical measurement like torque is.
It's basically torque over time.
So this means the faster that engine turns,
its revolutions per minute, or RPM,
the more work it can do, and the more horsepower it has.
Put in extremely simplified terms,
torque times RPM equals horsepower.
But that doesn't mean making big horsepower
is as simple as spinning the engine faster,
since that takes more and more energy
as the engine speed increases.
And as that torque decreases,
the horsepower calculation eventually can't keep up either.
This is also why transmissions
are so critical in keeping everything
in the appropriate "sweet spot",
but that's a topic for another video.
So that's the general idea
behind internal combustion engines.
But this was just a high-level look at the basics,
Engines 101, if you will.
There's obviously a whole lot more to say about engine tech,
so be sure to check out the other videos
in this series to learn more.
###
- [Narrator] In this installment
of Toyota's Engines 101 series,
we're taking a closer look
at one of the most critical parts of an engine:
its valvetrain.
This component has a massive impact
on the overall performance and character of an engine since,
in a nutshell, it's how the engine breathes.
So let's first explain
what exactly constitutes a valvetrain,
before getting into some more advanced aspects,
like how valve timing works
and how it can be used to enhance
not just performance, but also efficiency.
What does a valvetrain consist of?
Without a valve system,
the entire concept of an internal combustion engine
simply wouldn't work.
An engine's cylinders need intake valves
that open to pull air in,
and exhaust valves that open to push the exhaust gases out,
effectively inhaling and exhaling with each cycle,
creating the power that ultimately turns the wheels.
These valves are opened and closed
by a component called a camshaft.
By aligning the camshaft's lopsided lobes with the valves,
it can push against them as the camshaft turns,
opening each one with every rotation.
And since this camshaft is connected to the crankshaft,
the valves stay in time with the rest of the engine,
regardless of RPM.
Valvetrain design can vary in a few common ways:
How many valves there are,
how many camshafts operate them,
and where the components are located.
First, most engines nowadays
use two valves on the intake side
and two valves for the exhaust,
making for four per cylinder.
Next, some vehicles use a single camshaft
to manage both intake and exhaust valves,
while others use a dual camshaft layout
with one for each side.
Finally, while most modern vehicles have the camshafts
mounted above the valves to simply control them directly,
some also place the camshaft below the valves, in the block,
and instead use a system of pushrods and rocker arms
to actuate the overhead valves.
So, have you ever seen a vehicle
with a "sixteen-valve" or "DOHC" badge
and wondered what that meant?
Well, "sixteen-valve" on a four-cylinder engine
indicates that each cylinder has four valves.
And "DOHC" stands for "dual overhead cam,"
which further describes that vehicle's valvetrain layout -
two camshafts, positioned above the valves.
What is VVT-I?
So that's how a valvetrain works,
but it's not the whole story.
Timing those valves correctly is a delicate tightrope walk
between smoothness, efficiency, and power.
We're talking fractions of a millisecond
making a huge difference.
That's why hitting an ideal balance at 1500 rpm
might require a different timing than at 5500 rpm.
That's where variable valve timing comes in.
Nearly all auto manufacturers
have a variation of this technology,
and Toyota's is known as VVT-i,
or Variable Valve Timing with Intelligence.
The details of this feature can vary by model,
but the goal is the same.
The basic design centers around the cam gear
that pairs the camshaft to the crankshaft.
By implementing an internal shifting mechanism
within this gear,
the rotation of the camshaft
can be pushed slightly forward or backward,
which then advances or delays
the opening of the valves accordingly.
This way, valve timing can be adjusted
without impacting the rest of the engine cycle,
which in turn, enables the ability
to maintain an ideal balance across multiple RPM ranges.
Now, this brings us to our next point.
How does the Atkinson Cycle Engine make the valvetrain more efficient?
Instead of targeting a perfect balance,
what if valve timing could be adjusted
to maximize efficiency?
Well, this is exactly the thinking
behind Toyota's modern take
on the Atkinson Cycle engine design.
This design takes a different approach to combustion
compared with the usual Otto cycle engine
of a typical vehicle.
Without taking a deep dive into automotive history,
the general idea is this:
With the Atkinson design,
the intake valves are kept open into the compression stroke.
This effectively shortens that stroke,
while still maintaining an expansion ratio
based on the full cylinder.
This in turn results in a lower compression ratio,
reducing the energy needed to compress the air/fuel mixture.
The benefit here is that virtually all of the fuel
is burned while still inside the combustion chamber,
helping to reduce emissions and maximize efficiency.
The flipside, however,
is it means that the pistons aren't firing
with the maximum possible amount of pressure and power.
This tradeoff in power is why Toyota is selective
about when it gets used.
For instance, it makes sense to use it
when full power isn't needed, like highway cruising.
This is the idea behind Toyota's wide-range VVT-iW system,
where the engine can flip
between Otto and Atkinson modes as needed.
It also makes sense to use Atkinson cycle full-time
if it's being supported by an additional power source,
like an electric motor.
This is the thinking
behind a typical Toyota hybrid powertrain.
So that's a brief look at the valvetrain design
of an internal combustion engine,
not just what it is and how it works,
but also how its timing can be adjusted
for either an optimum balance of power and efficiency,
or even to crank the efficiency to the max.
To learn more about the technology inside Toyota vehicles,
or even just automotive engineering in general,
be sure to check out the other videos in this series,
which can be found on Toyota's YouTube channel.